OEP-41: Asynchronous Server Event Message Format
################################################

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - OEP
     - :doc:`OEP-41 <oep-0041-arch-async-server-event-messaging>`
   * - Title
     - Asynchronous Server Event Message Format
   * - Last Modified
     - 2022-01-09
   * - Authors
     - David Ormsbee <dave@edx.org>
   * - Arbiter
     - Christopher Pappas <cpappas@edx.org>
   * - Status
     - Accepted
   * - Type
     - Architecture
   * - Created
     - 2020-02-23
   * - Review Period
     - 2020-08-17
   * - Resolution
     - Accepted

********
Abstract
********

This OEP describes the general format and conventions the Open edX platform should use in
asynchronous event messaging across services. These events would be emitted when
a service has taken some action to data that it owns, and that other services
would be interested in. This could be a course publish, a user enrollment,
updates to catalog metadata, etc.

This OEP does not cover:

* Remote Procedure Calls, i.e. using messaging to send commands to other
  services. Events in this document are the services broadcasting, "Here is what
  I just did!" to interested parties, not "Please do this thing for me!"
* Real-time streaming of student learning events to external platforms, as
  detailed in `OEP-26 <oep-0026-realtime-events>`_, though it is possible that
  the implementation of OEP-26 might build on the infrastructure outlined in
  this document.
* Browser level notifications and event streaming along the lines of
  Server-Sent-Events, GraphQL subscriptions, or frameworks built on top of
  WebSocket. The interactions here are strictly server to server interactions
  between services serving the same site. Again, it is entirely possible that
  an implementation of browser level notifications would be built on top of the
  infrastructure outlined here.
* The specific transport and libraries used for this messaging. That will be
  specified in a follow-on OEP.


**********
Motivation
**********

Open edX has multiple services that need to copy data or take specific actions
when certain events occur in other services. For example:

* The start date of a course exists in both the Catalog subdomain represented by
  the course-discovery service, as well as in the LMS, where its value is used
  to help determine whether an enrolled student will have access to the content.
* Other services often have a user table, with data replicated from the LMS
  (the place where users register today).
* Publishing a new version of course content in Studio triggers a variety of
  LMS tasks to query and re-build optimized versions of course data for various
  systems like the Block Transformers that power the mobile application and
  course outline.
* Grading events in the LMS may trigger certificate generation if the user has
  exceeded the required threshold.

Open edX services already use `Django signals
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.11/topics/signals/>`_ for subscribing to
events within the same service, but we have no accepted recommendation for how
to do something similar across service boundaries. As the number of services in
Open edX has grown, the various ad hoc synchronization and communication methods
we've implemented over the years have caused numerous operational and
performance problems (particularly around catalog data). At the same time,
recent discussions around Domain Driven Design and data replication have given
us a better framing for the kind of relationship we want to have between various
services. There has also been a strong desire for a properly documented set of
integration APIs that would allow Open edX to better interoperate with other
applications in the ecosystem.

There is an opportunity to bring all these elements together and create a solid
foundation for simple, reliable, well documented, near real-time cross-service
message passing. But without some planning and design work, we may end up in an
even more chaotic place where each pairing of services uses different
conventions for this kind of communication.


*************
Specification
*************

Message Format
==============

The message format will use the `CloudEvents 1.0
<https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/master/spec.md>`_ specification, with
additional usage conventions that all Open edX services should adhere to.
CloudEvents was developed by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation, with
participation from major companies like Google, Microsoft, IBM, Red Hat, Oracle,
and Huawei. While the finalized 1.0 spec is only months old and the Python
tooling is primitive (advertised to break at any time), CloudEvents is also a
pretty minimal message envelope spec, with the basic required fields being
things that we'd want to have anyway.

Event messages will be UTF-8 encoded JSON documents of 64 KB or less. An
example:

.. code-block:: javascript

  {
    "id": "b3b3981e-7544-11ea-b663-acde48001122",
    "type": "org.openedx.catalog.course.created.v1",
    "specversion": "1.0",
    "time": "2020-02-23T09:00:00Z",
    "source": "/openedx/discovery/web",
    "sourcehost": "edx.devstack.lms",
    "minorversion": 2,
    "data": {
        // message specific payload here
    }
  }

Fields
======

All top level field names are specified by the CloudEvents spec, but most fields
defined by that standard have some leeway in how they're used for any given
system. Each field below has a link to CloudEvents requirements, as well as a
description of the conventions Open edX will use for that field. All Open edX
events should have all of the fields specified below (even if some are
considered optional in the CloudEvents spec).


`datacontenttype <https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/master/spec.md#datacontenttype>`_
********************************************************************************************

Example: ``"application/json"``

`RFC 2046 <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2046>`_ string value describing the
format of ``data`` attribute. It should be ``application/json`` the vast
majority of the time, but some events might have ``text/xml``.


`id <https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/master/spec.md#id>`_
******************************************************************

Example: ``"b3b3981e-7544-11ea-b663-acde48001122"``

Message ID. CloudEvents requires this to be a string that is unique for any
given source. We will use a UUID1 here, since it is easy to generate without
worrying about collisions, and it offers slightly more useful introspection
(timestamp and machine) than a random UUID4. The UUID will be encoded as a
string using Python's default behavior: lowercase and dash-separated.


``minorversion`` (extension)
****************************

Example: ``2``

This is an extension attribute we would be introducing to CloudEvents and
represents a minor version in semver reckoning, meaning that it increments when
we have made backwards compatible additions to the message payload in the
``data`` attribute. Values can only be integers. The initial value for
``minorversion`` should be ``0``. There is no corresponding ``majorversion``
because that information is encoded into the message type.


`source <https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/master/spec.md#source-1>`_
*****************************************************************************

Example: ``/openedx/discovery/web``

CloudEvents is very loose on the requirements for this field, with the only
strict requirement being that the combination of ``source`` + ``id`` is unique.
We get this for free because our ``id`` fields are UUIDs and will be globally
unique anyway. It is recommended that this field be an absolute URI, but
application-specific identifiers are permitted.

For Open edX, this field will be used to indicate the *logical* source of an
event, and will be of the form ``/{namespace}/{service}/{web|worker}``. All
services that are part of the standard distribution of Open edX should use
``openedx`` for the namespace. Examples of services might be "discovery", "lms",
"studio", etc. The value "web" will be used for events emitted by the web
application, and "worker" will be used for events emitted by asynchronous tasks
such as celery workers.

Message clients should avoid interpreting this value or making switching logic
based on where a message is coming from. These values can change without warning
as services are split, consolidated, renamed, and refactored. It is also
possible that the source of an event will be moved to a third party system that
adheres to the same contracts (e.g. a replacement catalog).


``sourcehost`` (extension)
**************************

Example: ``edx.devstack.lms``

This is an extension attribute and would represent the *physical* source of the
messageâ€“i.e. the host identifier of the server that emitted this event. This may
take the form of a hostname, fully qualified domain name, or IP address. This
value is meant for logging and debugging purposes.


`specversion <https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/master/spec.md#specversion>`_
************************************************************************************

Always: ``"1.0"``

Mandatory field that refers to the version of CloudEvents. We have to use "1.0"
to be spec-compliant.


`type <https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/master/spec.md#type>`_
**********************************************************************

Example: ``"org.openedx.catalog.course.created.v1"``

This is the name of our event. CloudEvents only requires that this be a string
describing the type of event, but recommends that it be prefixed with a
reverse-DNS name for namespacing purposes. We will use a period-separated
hierarchical name with the format ``{Reverse DNS}.{Architecture
Subdomain}.{Subject}.{Action}.{Major Version}``.

Reverse DNS
-----------

Example: ``org.openedx``

In this example, ``org.openedx`` is the generic prefix that would be used for
all Open edX installs. Events that are strictly edX-specific, like those that
might interact with internal IT or finance reporting systems, should use
``org.edx`` as the prefix instead. If in doubt, default to ``org.openedx``.

Subdomain (from Domain Driven Design)
-------------------------------------

Example: ``catalog``

The next part of the ``type`` hierarchy is the Subdomain. Examples of this are:

* catalog
* content_authoring
* credentials
* learning

It is the expectation that there are relatively few subdomains, and that they
will roughly match deployed services. Subdomain names should be lower cased and
use underscores if they are more than one word.

Subject
-------

Example: ``course``

The name of an entity that the event applies to. Examples might be ``course``,
``student``, ``enrollment``, ``order``, etc. Subjects may be namespaced, so
``special_exam.proctored.allowance`` could be a subject.

A subject should always mean the same thing within a subdomain, but can mean
different things across subdomains. For instance, what the LMS (``learning``
subdomain) calls a ``course`` might map to what the ``catalog`` subdomain would
call a ``course_run``. We should try to be consistent where possible, but each
subdomain ultimately gets to decide what its terms mean, and we should be
careful when translating a concept from one subdomain to another. For instance,
the ``content_authoring`` and ``learning`` subdomains might both have a concept
of a "due date" for an assignment. But while the ``content_authoring`` due date
is determined only by the content author, the ``learning`` due date might take
into account a student's cohort, individual due date extensions, accessibility
allowances, and any number of other things. Both subdomains may call it ``due``,
but the due date information from ``content_authoring`` is just an input to the
more complex due date information in ``learning``.

Action
------

Example: ``created``

This is the action that occurred for the event. Some of most common ones will be
``created``, ``updated``, and ``deleted``, but many applications will want more
specific actions like ``declined``, ``started``, ``verified``, etc. Applications
should prefer these more specific actions when possible, since they are usually
clearer for listeners and don't requiring knowing implementation details. For
instance, it is preferable to have a ``registration.completed`` event than to
have a ``registration.updated`` event and leave it to clients to check the
resulting message's payload for ``status: "complete"``.

Actions should be past tense, to better align with our existing conventions
around Django signals and learning analytics events (we're not completely
consistent, but we tend towards past tense).

Major Version
-------------

Example: ``v1``

The last portion is the major version of the message, starting with ``v1``. All
messages will have a major and minor version, with the minor version encoded in
the ``minorversion`` attribute. New fields may be added to a message without
incrementing the major version, but all additions *must* be backwards
compatible. If you increment this to make a backwards-incompatible change, you
will be expected to have a transition period where you are emitting the previous
major version event as well as the new one.


`time <https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/master/spec.md#time>`_
**********************************************************************

Example: ``"2020-02-23T09:00:00Z"``

Timestamp that the event occurred, in UTC using `RFC 3339
<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339>`_. If this event was sent because we
created a new row in the database, we should pull this ``time`` directly from
the ``created_at`` field in that model so that the output matches exactly.
Likewise, use ``updated_at`` for database updates. Do
*not* call ``datetime.now()`` in these situations because we will get times
that are just a few milliseconds offset from the database record of these
actions. Do call ``datetime.now()`` if the event happens and has no
corresponding database changes. If you are sending out multiple event messages
describing the same occurance (e.g. a version 1 and version 2 of an event), they
should have the *exact* same timestamp.


Message Content Data Guidelines
===============================

These are general guidelines to consider when creating your messages. There can
always be exceptional circumstances and use cases that require going against one
of these guidelines, but try to default to these guidelines unless you're really
sure about what you're doing.


Events are Created by the Owning Subdomain
******************************************

Teams at edX are broadly aligned to subdomains and roughly mapped to services.
Services should not emit events for other subdomains. For instance, the
ecommerce service is its own subdomain and should not be emitting ``catalog`` or
``learning`` events. It is sometimes the case that a subdomain encompasses
multiple services (e.g. Studio and Blockstore both operate on the
``content_authoring`` subdomain).


One Producer Service Per Event Type
***********************************

Each event type should be emitted by one, and only one, service. That service is
the source of truth for whatever entity the event describes. If course-discovery
emits an event describing when a course starts (e.g.
``org.openedx.catalog.course.start_date.changed``), it is *not* appropriate for
the LMS to send potentially conflicting information using that same event type.

Two services may have similar sounding events. The course-discovery service
(``catalog`` subdomain) might emit a ``org.openedx.catalog.course.created.v1``
event when a catalog entry for a course is created, while Studio
(``content_authoring`` subdomain) might emit a
``org.openedx.content_authoring.course.created.v1`` event when course content is
first authored there. These are similar, related events, but they are not the
same event type.

To help prevent naming collisions, the set of messages will be centralized into
a separate repository (or possibly a separate repository per logical subdomain).
The details of this would be worked out in a follow-on OEP.


Avoid Callbacks
***************

A callback is when you create a message with an ID or URL that you expect the
consumer to make a synchronous call to when it receives the message. This is
commonly used when an event represents some change that is too large to
practically fit into the 64K message. For instance, we currently emit a generic
``course_published`` Django signal whenever data is published in Studio, leading
to a cascade of calls from various apps to the ModuleStore in order to extract
the content data that they need.

Callbacks threaten performance and stability because they reduce a service's
ability to control its own load. For instance, a sudden increase in Courseware
traffic might generate a burst of student analytics events. If this stream of
events overwhelms your service's ability to consume them, the queue may start to
back up with unread events. Yet this shouldn't cause your service to fail, since
it still gets to control how quicky it consumes events off of that queue. It has
the freedom to either slowly catch up (if the burst was a momentary spike), or
to scale up additional workers to handle the higher throughput. Your service's
decision to scale up or down does not directly impact other services.

Things change when we introduce a callback to this same scenario. Say the
analytics events now include a callback URL to get basic user information. In
this scenario, doubling the consumers that your service has now also doubles the
load that your service is placing on the REST endpoint serving this user
information. There is no way for you to know whether this is really safe or not.

One thing to consider is whether we can emit multiple events that better target
specific consumer use cases. Let's take the ``course_published`` event as an
example. Some listeners only care about schedule changes, because they have to
account for when a course starts and ends. Search indexing really only wants to
know the exact bit of content that was modified so that it can update that text.
There is no rule that says a single user action has to translate into a single
event. Be mindful of what your consumers actually care about and the broad use
cases you're trying to serve.

If a callback is still necessary, try to make sure that it points to an
especially robust and performant endpoint. For instance, an event that is fired
when a user changes their profile information might include a URL to the S3
location of their new profile picture. Just keep in mind that messages may be
read long after they're generated, and any presigned S3 URLs you generate might
be expired by the time a consumer gets them.


.. _Event Messaging Architectural Goals:

Architectural Goals
===================

This OEP is strongly aligned with the `Achitecture Manifesto
<https://openedx.atlassian.net/l/c/wN425om2>`_ themes of decentralization and
asynchronous communication. In addition, there are a number of specific pain
points we hope to address by introducing this kind of system.


Eliminate Blocking, Synchronous Requests
****************************************

Synchronous requests between services have been the source of multiple site
outages over the years, particularly when course-discovery becomes overloaded
with edx-platform generated requests.


Eliminate Expensive, Delayed, Batch Synchronization
***************************************************

We currently have processes that make extremely expensive requests across
services to synchronize data, particularly from course-discovery. Aside from
being wasteful (relatively few entries actually change between these batches),
it is also difficult to properly scale for. Most auto-scaling is built to
trigger once particular thresholds around CPU are hit, and does not deal well
with momentary bursts of load that are 5-10X normal levels. We are forced into
some combination of over-provisioning and/or accepting periodic spikes in
overall service latency. In a situation where we are already running near
capacity, a spike like this can be enough to trigger a cascade of failures.

In addition to being expensive, this method of synchronizing data is extremely slow. A small update that could have happened in near real-time, may instead need to wait half a day or more until the next scheduled batch synchronization occurs.

Reduce the need for Plugins
***************************

`Django app plugins <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/tree/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/plugins>`_
exist to help decouple core edx-platform code from third party extensions. But
in some cases, the only reason the plugin needs to exist at all is because there
is no other way to get notifications for important lifecycle events like user
registration, course enrollment, score changes, etc. Having a stable set of
event APIs will allow many of these to exist as independently deployed services
that don't need to be run in the same process as the LMS.

Flexibly Integrate with Event Producers
***************************************

New consumers or down stream services currently would require upstream changes in order to consume an existing event. This makes the platform inflexible, and adds coupling between services and teams. Read more about `event-driven architecture`_ and its potential for "improved responsiveness and time to market".

.. _event-driven architecture: https://www.thoughtworks.com/decoder/event-driven-architecture

Simplify Integration to External Systems
****************************************

Having a clearly defined set of events would allow for simpler third party
integration in areas like student learner event processing and course catalog
management.

**************
Change History
**************

2022-01-09: Clarified that time field could be based on updated_at time when appropriate.

2022-03-24: Enhance "Architectural Goals" section and minor edits.

2020-02-23: Original OEP.
