edX.org Event Bus Deployment Choice
===================================

Context
-------

* Setting up an event bus can be complex since most modern brokers come in multiple parts that all need to be deployed
  and maintained together to create a working broker.

* The event bus system is still experimental in Open edX and investing a lot in infrastructure before we can prove out
  the value of the technology does not seem to be a valuable use of time.

* The Infrastructure team at edX does not currently have capacity to manage this system in house on top of other
  services they provide.

Decision
--------

To begin proving out the event bus technology, edx.org will run the underlying broker via a software as a servics(SaaS)
provider.  This will allow us to begin prototyping sooner and get a working end-to-end system that we can then iterate
on.

.. note::

    This decision is specific to edx.org and is not a requirement or recommendation of how other deployments in the Open
    edX Community manage their brokers.

Future Direction
----------------

In the future we expect that there will be value in moving the broker in-house where it can provide stronger SLAs and
can be more closely monitored.  In this situation, we may want to strongly consider hosting in our VPCs while still
using a vendor to do the managing.  Vendors like Streamnative provide this service which they called ``Managed Pulsar``
which would all us to reap the control and performance benefits of hosting in our VPCs while still keeping the
management costs low.


