==========================
OEP-16: Bootstrap Adoption
==========================

+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| OEP           | :doc:`OEP-16 </oeps/oep-0016>`            |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Title         | Bootstrap Adoption                        |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Last Modified | 2017-04-21                                |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Author        | Andy Armstrong <andya@edx.org>            |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Arbiter       | _TBD_                                     |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Status        | Draft                                     |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Type          | Architecture                              |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Created       | 2017-04-18                                |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+

Abstract
========

In order to accelerate development, and provide a more consistent user
experience for our users, edX will adopt Bootstrap 4 to build all of its web
applications. The Open edX community will be able to extend the platform
using any of Bootstrap's collection of components, as well as use Bootstrap
theming to brand their instances. An edX-supported subset of components will
be provided that are verified to support `WCAG 2.0`_ to ensure that all new user
interfaces conform to the `edX accessibility guidelines`_.

Technology Selection
====================

The following rubric was used to assess potential technologies:

* Learning curve / prior experience
* Options for community - force them down a path or give them options
* Frameworks that are opinionated vs. flexible
* Ability to easily build accessible front-ends
* Ease of design-framework integration
* DIY framework vs. all-inclusive platform
* Willingness to dedicate resources to development and maintenance
* Ease of prototyping
* Community project support
* Compliance and security considerations
* Availability of developers (hiring ability)
* Ability to achieve business strategy

In addition, there were a number of key goals that such a technology must
address:

* accessibility
* internationalization and right-to-left languages
* theming
* performance
* mobile-first responsive designs
* extensibility / ease of overriding
* modularity / scoping
* Open edX community interest
* size and activity of the framework's community?
* integration with build systems
* integration into existing edX pages

Bootstrap is the industry standard web framework with a comprehensive collection
of web components. Each of these components is designed to be mobile-first,
meaning that Bootstrap applications look good at phone, tablet, and desktop
sizes.

Bootstrap 4 is the first version to support key requirements for adoption
within the edX platform:

* Bootstrap 4 has switched to using Sass (previous versions used Less)
* It provides a more flexible grid system that supports all of edX's layouts
* It uses ems and rems for responsive typography

Another key factor in the switch is the wide availability of Boostrap-based
React components. With edX's move to adopt React (see
`OEP-11 - Front End Technology Standards`_), this will provide the community
with an ever increasing set of components with which to extend the platform.

Finally, a critical benefit to using Bootstrap is that the edX community
does not need to build or work with a proprietary markup scheme. XBlock authors
and platform developers alike can target the standard Bootstrap markup which
is very well documented. This saves time in development, and also ensures that
the new user interface will be rendered according to the current theme.

Specification
=============

The recommendation is to adopt Bootstrap 4 starting immediately so that new
features can be built following this best practice. In edX platform, the core
templates will be parameterized to support the option of using Bootstrap. With
this option chosen, the page skeleton (header, footer, navigation) will
automatically render in a mobile-first design using Bootstrap components.

New Bootstrap themes will be implemented in the `edX UI Toolkit`_. These themes
will be provided as Sass partial files that can be included into any project's
Sass file. The files will be as follows:
* A partial defining the standard edX fonts, layouts, margins etc
* An edx.org brand partial which defines the edX colors and background images
* An Open edX partial that defines the community colors and images

An Open edX site can provide its own brand colors and images while still
importing the standard fonts, layouts, margins etc. If desired, even those
rules can be overridden to provide full flexibility in theming.

One important consideration is that as of April 2017, Bootstrap 4 is still
in alpha. Based upon the proof-of-concept, this does not seem to be an issue
as the functionality is very complete, and the beta release is imminent. As
this is an open source project, it is straightforward to track the work, and
to provide fixes as necessary.

Backward Compatibility
======================

The approach taken in the reference implementation was to introduce a new
v3 style, thus leaving all v1 and v2 styles unaffected. This allows pages
to be converted one at a time.

An investigation was performed to see whether Bootstrap components could be used
on non-Bootstrap pages, but the conclusion was that the conflicts made this more
trouble than it was worth. The recommendation is to convert pages in one shot
which will be quicker and will have fewer issues.

Reference Implementation
========================

In order to prove the viability of Bootstrap 4, a proof-of-concept was built
that converted three different pages from the LMS:

* The course bookmarks page which was a simple first page to target
* The main courseware page which contains a number of custom styling rules
* The new course outline page which is a typical `edX Pattern Library`_ page

The following work was done:

* A new lms-main-v3.scss file was introduced that used Bootstrap
* An edX Bootstrap theme was implemented and included as a partial
* The three pages were switched over to use the v3 styling
* A "uses_bootstrap" context parameter enables a template to add Bootstrap JS
* The header was reimagined with Bootstrap components
* The page styles were updated to use Bootstrap mixins and theme variables

For the courseware, a new lms-course-v3.scss was added

* This file included all of the course-specific Sass partials
* Any global-level rules were excluded to allow Bootstrap's styles to be used

See the `Bootstrap Proof-of-Concept PR`_ for more details, including screenshots
of the three converted pages. Note: the proof-of-concept was mostly completed
during a two-day hackathon, thus demonstrating how quickly these conversions can
be done.

Rejected Alternatives
=====================

edX Pattern Library
-------------------

The `edx Pattern Library`_ is an initiative that was started in 2015 to
modernize the way that edX applications were built. At the time, Bootstrap was
considered to not be suitable for edX because applications always looked like
they were built with Bootstrap. In addition, Bootstrap's rules were defined
using Less and so were not compatible with edX's Sass-based styles. Finally, all
sizing was done using pixels which was not compatible with responsive
typography.

The pattern library project was somewhat successful, and a number of edX
pages were built using it. However, it became clear that there were not enough
resources available to build an entire web framework, and the non-standard
nature of the project meant that the community chose not to adopt it. It was
at this point that the `edX Front End Working Group`_ decided to investigate
other alternatives.

For more information, see the wiki page `State of the Pattern Library`_.

Material Design
---------------

Google's Material Design is another very successful web framework that was
evaluated. It was ultimately considered to be too opinionated to support the
variety of sites in the Open edX community.

.. _Bootstrap: http://getbootstrap.com/
.. _Bootstrap Proof-of-Concept PR: https://github.com/edx/edx-platform/pull/14834
.. _edX accessibility guidelines: http://edx.readthedocs.io/projects/edx-developer-guide/en/latest/conventions/accessibility.html
.. _edX Front End Working Group: https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/display/FEDX/Front+End+Working+Group
.. _edX UI Toolkit: http://ui-toolkit.edx.org/
.. _OEP-11 - Front End Technology Standards: http://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/oep-0011.html
.. _edX Pattern Library: http://ux.edx.org/
.. _State of the Pattern Library: https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/display/FEDX/State+of+the+Pattern+Library
.. _WCAG 2.0: http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/
