==========================
OEP-2: Repository Metadata
==========================

+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| OEP           | :doc:`OEP-2 <oep-0002>`                   |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Title         | Repository Metadata                       |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Last-Modified | 2016-10-13                                |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Author        | Calen Pennington <cale@edx.org>           |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Arbiter       | Eddie Fagin <eddie@edx.org>               |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Status        | Accepted                                  |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Type          | Best Practice                             |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Created       | 2016-04-21                                |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+

Abstract
========

Proposes a standard format for repository metadata for Open edX projects.

Motivation
==========

One of the primary goals for Best Practice OEPs is to standardize techniques
and tools across Open edX repositories. However, without
tooling, it will be difficult to move all of the repositories in the same
direction (and hard to validate which ones have been updated). This OEP exists
to fill that gap.  By providing a standard format for metadata about accordance
to Best Practice OEPs, tools can be developed in the future to report on the
current status of all of the Open edX repositories, and how well they follow
the Best Practices listed in the OEPs.

Bear in mind that particular classes of Open edX repositories may have
different Best Practices. The practices that apply to an XBlock may not be the
same as those that apply to a standalone Django service or to a Django app.

Specification
=============

Each repo in the Open edX system will include a file ``openedx.yaml``, with the
following fields:

``owner``: string
    The github user/team responsible for the repository.

``nick``: string (optional)
    A short-name for the repository used by reporting tools created by the
    edX Open Source team. Should be 3-4 characters, because this value
    is used in charts with very limited space on their axes.

``tags``: list of strings (optional)
    Used to group repositories by in reporting tools. Sample tags: core,
    mobile analytics.

``oeps``: dictionary (optional)
    A list of keys corresponding to Best Practice OEPs (in the format
    ``oep-n``). Each value would be one of ``True``, ``False``, or a
    reason dictionary. ``True`` and ``False`` would indicate accordance (or
    lack thereof) with the specified OEP. A reason dictionary
    must have ``state`` and ``reason`` keys. The ``state`` key is a boolean,
    and ``reason`` is a string that should explain why it's ok that the
    ``state`` is ``False`` (this will be displayed in reporting tools).

    If an OEP isn't listed in the ``oeps`` dictionary, then it is assumed to be
    ``False``, unless the reporting tool can auto-detect accordance.

``track-pulls``: boolean (optional)

    .. This should be moved to a separate OEP

    Whether or not this repository should be tracked for creation of OSPR tickets.

``openedx-release``: dictionary (optional)

    .. This should be moved to a separate OEP

    This controls how this repo is managed during the Open edX release process.

    Possible keys:

    ``ref``
        The name of a branch in this repo. This is the branch that will be tagged
        when an Open edX release is made.

    ``requirements``
        The path to a requirements.txt-style file in this repo. This file will
        be consulted to find the commit to tag in dependent repos indicated by
        ``parent-repo`` keys.

    ``parent-repo``
        The name of another repo, one that installs this repo via a requirements
        file.  The parent repo's requirements file will indicate the commit to
        tag in this repo.

``obsolete``: boolean (optional)
    If ``True``, this specifies that this repository is obsolete and no longer
    maintained by ``edX``.


For example, in the `edx-platform`_ repo, the file might look like:

.. _edx-platform: https://github.com/edx/edx-platform

.. code-block:: yaml

    # openedx.yaml

    ---
    owner: edx/teaching-and-learning
    nick: edx
    tags:
        - core
        - xblock
        - lms
        - studio
    oeps:
        oep-314: True  # edx-platform uses django 3.14
        oep-42:
            state: False
            reason: This OEP doesn't actually exist


Rationale
=========

The keys in ``openedx.yaml`` were derived from existing repository metadata collected
by edx.org.

The design of the ``oeps`` dictionary was guided by a couple of use cases:

1. Adding a new OEP that few repositories will support, initially. We shouldn't
   need to update all repositories to detect if they are in accordance, we should
   be able to assume that they aren't, or automatically detect whether they are.
2. Repositories may have specific requirements that force them to not implement a
   best practice. The tools should be able to present that reasoning to anyone
   looking across repositories, and the reasons should be documented in the repositories
   themselves.
3. As much as possible, Best Practices should be autodetected, but because they will
   often involve a judgement call, autodetection shouldn't be mandatory.


Change History
==============

2016-08-24
----------

* Add documentation of the ``openedx-release``, ``track-pulls``, ``dead``,
  and ``nick`` keys in the ``openedx.yaml`` file.

2016-06-29
----------

* Original publication


