================================
OEP-11: Front End Best Practices
================================

+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| OEP           | :doc:`OEP-11 </oeps/oep-0011>`            |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Title         | Front End Best Practices                  |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Last Modified | 2016-10-19                                |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Author        | Andy Armstrong <andya@edx.org>            |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Arbiter       | TBD                                       |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Status        | Draft                                     |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Type          | Best Practice                             |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Created       | 2016-10-19                                |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+

Abstract
========

This document describes the best practices for developing front end applications
and components for Open edX. It covers the techniques and approaches that
are currently recommended, as well as the suggested technologies and libraries
that should be used.


Motivation
==========

The front end landscape is large, confusing and constantly changing. A good
place to get an overview of the industry's current best practices is
`The State of JavaScript 2016 Survey`_.

Open edX is a large platform that provides its front end functionality in
a variety of ways. The major applications (Studio, LMS, Insights, Otto) are
built as Django views that return rendered pages consisting of HTML, CSS and
JavaScript. In addition, components can be created with `XBlocks`_ which use
Python code to render themselves as HTML fragments along with their CSS and
JavaScript dependencies.

Within this document, the phrase "front end" is used to mean any part
of the platform that is shown to users. This phrase is a little confusing
as the front end is generated by Django views which are implemented as
Python code running on a "back end" server. The true back end is the
APIs that the front end communicates with to access and update information
on behalf of the user.

Note: this document provides many recommendations which are provided as
guides when developing new front ends. It is important to always use the
best tool for the job, so there will be situations where an alternative
approach or technology should be adopted.

Specification
=============

Best Practices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. **Use server-side rendering whenever possible**

   Rationale: Server-side rendering gives the content to the user
   immediately without requiring additional round-trips. This can make
   for large performance improvements on slow networks or mobile devices.

   When a dynamic client-side experience is required, then the server-side
   page should include JavaScript code along with the HTML. See the
   technical recommendations below for more detail.

2. **Front-ends should be self-contained**

   Rationale: Front end applications require a variety of types of assets
   that need to be managed together, including code, styles, templates, and
   images. For Django apps and XBlocks, all of these assets should live
   within the app's or block's own directory rather than being located
   in shared locations within the consuming application. Ideally, apps or blocks
   should live in their own repository and should be pip installed into
   and should be pip installed into the main application.

3. **Designs should be built upon patterns from the edX Pattern Library**

   Rationale: The `edX Pattern Library`_  is a collection of web application
   components and visual styles that can be used to develop UIs that are
   consistent with the edX platform. Using the pattern library ensures that
   web applications follow best practices for user experience, theming,
   and accessibility.

   You can learn more about building user interfaces with the pattern
   library in the Developer's Guide chapter `Developing User Interfaces`_.

4. **Front-ends should consume and extract reusable UI components**

   Rationale: when developing new applications, developers should prefer
   reuse of existing components over building custom front end logic.
   If a new component is required, it should be built as a new reusable
   addition to the `edX UI Toolkit`_, based upon patterns from the
   `edX Pattern Library`_. This ensures that future development can
   reuse this component, while also standardizing how it behaves
   for the user in terms of user interface, accessibility, theming
   and so on.

6. **Front-ends should manage history consistently**

   Rationale: it is important that rich-client applications provide a
   consistent history to their users. This includes both the ability to
   use the back button in a natural way, and to be able to use URLs to
   deep link to any part of the application. History should be updated
   for every action that feels to the user that they are on a new page.

7. **Features should work equally well on mobile and web platforms**

   Rationale: Open edX provides iOS and Android applications in addition
   to its web applications, and so new learner features need to be implemented
   for all three platforms. The simplest way to achieve feature parity is to
   provide a responsive web experience that can be used on phones and tablets
   as well as on desktops and laptops. The `edx Pattern Library`_ helps with
   this by providing a responsive grid system along with components that
   work equally well on mobile and web.

8. **Designs should be fully accessible**

   Rationale: Open edX measures and evaluates accessibility using the World
   Wide Web Consortium’s `Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0`_.
   All features merged into edX repositories are expected to conform to
   Level AA of this specification and to satisfy the requirements outlined in
   the `edX Website Accessibility Policy`_.

   You can learn more about developing accessible applications with
   the Developer's Guide chapter `edX Accessibility Guidelines`_.

9. **Front end applications should support localization**

   Rationale: Open edX is used by learners all over the world, and so
   it is critical that all new functionality support localization. This means
   that every string in an application should be marked for translation,
   and it also includes ensuring that all new user interfaces will switch to
   right-to-left mode when the language requires it.

   You can learn more about localization with the Developer's Guide
   chapter `edX Internationalization`_.

10. **Front end implementations should support theming**

   Rationale: Open edX is used by organizations around the world,
   and each one requires that the user experience is based upon their
   own brand. This includes elements as simple as overriding the fonts,
   imagery and color schemes, to more complex customization of headers,
   footers and registration flows.

   You can learn more about how Open edX supports theming with
   the guide `Changing Themes for an Open edX Site`_. One simple way to
   make your interface themeable is to use patterns from the
   `edX Pattern Library`_ as they already support theming.

11. **Front end code should be safe from cross site scripting**

   Cross Site Scripting (XSS) vulnerabilities allow user-supplied data to be
   incorrectly executed as code in a web browser. This can allow an attacker
   to inject malicious scripts, which in the worst case can cause the loss
   of private user data.

   In order to keep your code safe from such attackers, you should follow the
   best practices laid out in the guide
   `Preventing Cross Site Scripting Vulnerabilities`_.

Technology Selection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. **Server-side content should be rendered with Django Templates**

   Rationale: There are many template languages available for Django,
   but the simplest option is to use the built-in Django template engine.
   The Open edX codebase has a mixture of Django and Mako templates, but the
   former are easier to reason about because they don't support arbitrary
   code evaluation. See `Reasons for rejecting Mako`_ for a more detailed
   explanation.

   **Exception**: Mako templates can continue to be used within edx-platform
   for consistency with the existing code base. This is because the base
   templates and theming support are all provided via Mako, so it is too
   much to expect a new feature to be implemented with a different framework.
   There is much desire to replace Mako within edx-platform so this
   exception may eventually be removed.

2. **ECMAScript 2015 should be the supported version of JavaScript**

   Rationale: ECMAScript is the standardized version of JavaScript,
   and modern front end libraries typically use ES2015 (aka ES6).
   Most browsers now provide native support for ES2015, but to support
   ES2016 or older browsers it is recommended to use `Babel`_ which can
   transpile various JavaScript dialects into ES5 (or ES2015, in the future).

   Note: use of ES2015 features should be preferred to the use of older
   libraries such as CoffeeScript and Underscore which have been subsumed
   into the newer standard.

3. **JavaScript libraries should be installed via npm**

   Rationale: It is important that JavaScript libraries are kept
   up-to-date, and one key component is to make it as simple as possible
   to perform upgrades. Projects that use npm maintain all of their
   library requirements in a single package.json file, which can be
   easily changed as the versions change.

4. **JavaScript code should follow the edX ESLint configuration**

   Rationale: In order to standardize and enforce Open edX's JavaScript
   coding style across multiple codebases, edX has published an ESLint
   configuration that provides an enforceable specification. The
   `edX ESLint Config`_ is made available as an npm package that can be
   installed into any Open edX package.

5. **Use React and Redux when building new client-side applications**

   Rationale: There are a large number of JavaScript libraries for
   building rich client applications, but many of them are too
   rigid for a flexible, extensible codebase like Open edX. The
   edX front end working group (aka FedX) has chosen the combination
   of React and Redux as the optimal way to build new client-side
   applications. A great primer on the benefits of this approach is
   `A Study Plan to Cure JavaScript Fatigue`_.

   An interesting area for future exploration is `React Native`_ which
   is a variant of React that can be used to render native iOS and Android
   applications. This could be a potential solution to build consistent
   experiences more efficiently across web and mobile. See `React at edX`_
   for more details.

   Note: the other modern library that many organizations are using
   is Angular 2.  See `Reasons for rejecting Angular`_ for an exploration
   as to why this does not work as well as React for edX.

   Exception: when building new applications within edx-platform, it
   is currently acceptable to use Backbone.  Backbone is a somewhat old
   technology in the JavaScript world and has seen a rapid drop off in usage
   within the community. The plan is to incrementally adopt React within
   edx-platform as it can interoperate cleanly with Backbone.

6. **JavaScript dependencies should be managed with AMD modules**

   Rationale: Open edX is a large, complicated code base, and it is
   getting more tangled over time. It is important that applications be
   composed as modules, and AMD is the standard module system for JavaScript.
   It allows code to declare the dependencies it requires, rather than forcing
   every page to load all possible libraries.

   A majority of edX code uses `RequireJS`_ (and its associated libraries
   RequireJS Text and RequireJS Optimizer) to handle AMD modueles. In
   particular, RequireJS Optimizer supports intelligent bundling to package
   together all required libraries into a single file for faster performance.
   Note that other edX applications use `Webpack`_ which can also process
   RequireJS-style dependencies as well as the newer Common JS standard.

7. **CSS should be generated using SASS**

   Rationale: Sass is an extension of CSS that adds power and elegance to
   the basic language. It makes the maintenance of large CSS files more
   manageable though the ability to use variables, mixins, imports and more.
   In particular, it makes theming possible with the ability to override
   variables that define colors, fonts etc.

   You can find out more about Sass with the official documentation here:
   `Sass`_.

8. **Applications should be built for production using Webpack**

   Rationale: Webpack is the tool of choice for code optimization and
   bundling, as it is widely used throughout the industry, and because
   it seamlessly handles modern code bases as well as all of the older
   technologies used by edX, such as `RequireJS`_.

   Note: There are already a variety of technologies used within Open edX,
   none of which is a clear winner. RequireJS Optimizer is used for bundling,
   Django Pipeline is used by edx-platform, Django Compressor is used by some
   of the Ecommerce applications, and Webpack is prevalent in pure front-end
   implementations.


Open Questions
==============

.. _JavaScript frameworks:

1. **Which more modern JavaScript framework should be supported?**

   The JavaScript space is very fast moving as can be seen in
   `The State of JavaScript 2016 Survey`_. There is a lot of momentum
   around `React`_, and it appears to have many qualities that would
   make it a good fit for edX. It is too early to make this call, but
   plans are being made to evaluate its usage. See `React at edX`_ for
   more details.

2. **How should offline support be provided?**

   For many mobile users, it would be very useful if they could continue
   their Open edX courses while offline. This is true both for true mobile
   apps as well as for responsive web applications. This is an area that
   has not been explored much up to now, but which will only become more
   important going forward. In particular, we should look at the great
   capabilities provided by service workers. See the article
   `Service Workers: An Introduction`_ for a good starting point.

3. **Should Universal JavaScript be considered?**

   There are many companies that are seeing performance benefits by
   pre-rendering their dynamic client-side applications on the server first.
   The most common approach is to run the same JavaScript code both in the
   browser and using Node on the server. This requires the use of a JavaScript
   framework that does not perform direct manipulation of the DOM, but instead
   works with an abstraction of the desired HTML. For example, Netflix is
   seeing great performance gains by using `React`_ in this way, as can be
   seen in the blog post `Making Netflix Faster`_.

4. **Where do web components fit with Open edX applications?**

   Web Components is a W3C recommendation that allows developers to create
   custom HTML elements for use within their web applications. The
   `Polymer Project` provides a library that allows web components to be
   built in most modern browsers. It seems that there is a useful overlap
   between web components and Open edX's `XBlocks`_

5. **Should HTTP/2 be used in preference to asset bundling?**

   The Hypertext Transfer Protocol Version 2 (HTTP/2) enables more efficient
   network communication between clients and servers. In particular, it
   allows for multiple requests to be handled with the same TCP connection,
   which removes most of the benefits of asset bundling. It is not yet
   clear whether this is ready for full scale adoption, but it would reduce
   a lot of complexity from application's asset pipelines.

6. **Should Jinja2 be considered in preference to Django Templates?**

   `Jinja2`_ is a popular alternative to Django Templates, that has not been
   evaluated for use within Open edX.


Rejected Alternatives
=====================

Note: this section needs fleshing out...

.. _Reasons for rejecting Angular:
1. **Angular**

   Needs fleshing out...

.. _Reasons for rejecting Bootstrap:
2. **Bootstrap**

   An evaluation was performed,
 - size
 - not accessible (although there is this an accessibility plugin)
 - too inflexible
 - might want to consider compatibility to allow mixing Bootstrap components
   into pattern library pages. See the edX Bootstrap theme provided by
   the community as one approach.

   Needs fleshing out...

.. _Reasons for rejecting CoffeeScript:
3. **CoffeeScript**

   The Open edX codebase made heavy use of CoffeeScript for several years,
   but it has now been officially deprecated. Most of the language
   benefits of CoffeeScript are now made available via ES2015.

.. _Reasons for rejecting Mako:
4. **Mako**

   There are a number of reasons why Django templates is preferred to Mako:

   * Mako templates are not safe by default, meaning that it is very easy
   to introduce cross-site scripting vulnerabilities.
   * Mako templates are hard to unit test because they require that the
   whole Django context be available in case the template tries to
   access it. Django templates only have access to the context object
   that is passed to it, so it is very easy to simulate all possible
   scenarios.

   Needs fleshing out...

.. Cross-references
.. _Babel: https://babeljs.io/
.. _Bootstrap: http://getbootstrap.com/
.. _Changing Themes for an Open edX Site: http://edx.readthedocs.io/projects/edx-installing-configuring-and-running/en/open-release-eucalyptus.master/configuration/changing_appearance/theming/index.html
.. _Developing User Interfaces: http://edx.readthedocs.io/projects/edx-developer-guide/en/latest/user_interface_development.html
.. _edX Accessibility Guidelines: http://edx.readthedocs.io/projects/edx-developer-guide/en/latest/conventions/accessibility.html
.. _edX ESLint Config: https://github.com/edx/eslint-config-edx
.. _edX Internationalization: http://edx.readthedocs.io/projects/edx-developer-guide/en/latest/conventions/internationalization/index.html
.. _edX Pattern Library: http://ux.edx.org/
.. _edX UI Toolkit: http://ui-toolkit.edx.org/
.. _edX Website Accessibility Policy: https://www.edx.org/accessibility
.. _HTTP 2: http://httpwg.org/specs/rfc7540.html
.. _Jinja2: http://jinja.pocoo.org/
.. _Making Netflix Faster: http://techblog.netflix.com/2015/08/making-netflixcom-faster.html
.. _Modernizing the edX front end stack: https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/display/FEDX/Modernizing+the+edX+front+end+stack
.. _Polymer Project: https://www.polymer-project.org/
.. _Preventing Cross Site Scripting Vulnerabilities: http://edx.readthedocs.io/projects/edx-developer-guide/en/latest/conventions/safe_templates.html
.. _React: https://github.com/reactjs
.. _React at edX: https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/display/FEDX/React+at+edX
.. _React Native: https://facebook.github.io/react-native/
.. _Sass: http://sass-lang.com/
.. _Service Workers: An Introduction: https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/getting-started/primers/service-workers
.. _The State of JavaScript 2016 Survey: http://stateofjs.com/
.. _A Study Plan to Cure JavaScript Fatigue: https://medium.com/@sachagreif/a-study-plan-to-cure-javascript-fatigue-8ad3a54f2eb1#.hfs4ktxuf
.. _Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0: http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG/
.. _Webpack: https://webpack.github.io/
.. _XBlocks: https://xblock.readthedocs.org/
