Architecture Decision Record: Using ADRs
========================================

Context
-------

To understand the context for using an ADR, an Architecture Decision Record, you
must first get familiar with the process for creating an `OEP`_, a document that
details a specific technology decision being made by the Open edX community.

The goal of this process is to have a lightweight way to make similar type
decisions that are either:
- More specific to just this single repository, or
- Serving as a possible stepping stone toward a future full-blown OEP.

Decision
--------

** START HERE!!!

We will document every architecture-level decision for Arachne and its
core modules with an `Architecture Decision Record`_. These are a well
structured, relatively lightweight way to capture architectural
proposals. They can serve as an artifact for discussion, and remain as
an enduring record of the context and motivation of past decisions.

The workflow will be:

1. A developer creates an ADR document outlining an approach for a
   particular question or problem. The ADR has an initial status of
   “proposed.”
2. The developers and steering group discuss the ADR. During this
   period, the ADR should be updated to reflect additional context,
   concerns raised, and proposed changes.
3. Once consensus is reached, ADR can be transitioned to either an
   “accepted” or “rejected” state.
4. Only after an ADR is accepted should implementing code be committed
   to the master branch of the relevant project/module.
5. If a decision is revisited and a different conclusion is reached, a
   new ADR should be created documenting the context and rationale for
   the change. The new ADR should reference the old one, and once the
   new one is accepted, the old one should (in its “status” section) be
   updated to point to the new one. The old ADR should not be removed or
   otherwise modified except for the annotation pointing to the new ADR.

Status
------

Accepted

Consequences
------------

1. Developers must write an ADR and submit it for review before
   selecting an approach to any architectural decision – that is, any
   decision that affects the way Arachne or an Arachne application is
   put together at a high level.
2. We will have a concrete artifact around which to focus discussion,
   before finalizing decisions.
3. If we follow the process, decisions will be made deliberately, as a
   group.
4. The master branch of our repositories will reflect the high-level
   consensus of the steering group.
5. We will have a useful persistent record of why the system is the way
   it is.

.. _Architecture Decision Record: http://thinkrelevance.com/blog/2011/11/15/documenting-architecture-decisions
.. _OEP: https://github.com/edx/open-edx-proposals/blob/master/oeps/oep-0001.rst
